Prior to the Norman conquest, Britain was ruled by the Saxons who were of
Viking descent.

King Canute was the King of England until 1053 - he was a Viking King and had
to share power with Godwin, Earl of Wessex.

When King Canute died in 1053, he left the crown to Edward the Confessor who
returned from exile in Normandy.  However, this was not an easy reign, as
Edward had to share power with Godwin.  Eventually, Edward threw Godwin out of
England for the murder of Edward's brother.

However, Godwin returned to Britain and defeated Edward's armies, turning
Edward into a puppet King.

When Godwin died of a stroke, his sons (who included Harold, later to become
King of England) effectively ran the country.  Edward married Godwin's daughter
but no heir was produced.  In 1065, on his death-bed, Edward touched the hand
of Harold, who took this as 'the hand of God', nominating Harold to be the
successor to the throne.

Norman history states that Edward had promised the crown to William the
Bastard, Duke of Normandy (later to become known as William the Conqueror).
William decided to take the crown by force and received the Pope's blessing,
which enabled him to raise a large army.

The tale from then on is told in the Bayeaux tapestry.

In the days leading up to the Norman invasion, the Vikings attacked Britain
with the aid of Harold's brother Tosdig.  They landed and made their way as far
as York, where they met Harold's army at the battle of Stamford Bridge.  This
battle saw the defeat of the Vikings with the death of both Tosdig and the
Viking King Hardrada.

On the day after this battle, the Norman fleet landed on English shores,
forcing Harold to turn back.  Luckily, the terrain had meant that the Normans
found it difficult to move very quickly and they met at Hastings - an important
battleground which would provide the way forward to London.

After a bloody battle, Harold's army was defeated and the Bayeaux tapestry has
been taken to show that Harold was killed by an arrow in the eye.  The defeat
also saw around half of the English nobility killed.  Harold's body is believed
to be buried at Waltham Abbey.

William was finally crowned at Westminster Abbey on 25th December 1066.  The
coronation was said to be chaotic with William visibly shaking.

William's early reign was problematic - the North of England still had strong
Viking sympathies and they invited King Swain to come across to Britain.  King
Swain was defeated by William who then went on to massacre and cause famine
across much of the North of England.
